Testing, testing, one, two, three, four, one, two, three.
Testing, one, two, three.
Thankfully, this is a sunny day after a very cold night.
13th of December, sitting in the Reynolds building,
having the joy and pleasure of chatting with Dr. Sam Black.
Sam, to introduce yourself to anyone who would hear this tape or read the transcription, describe yourself before you got to A&M.
Where did you grow up?
What did family do?
Go to high school, college, experience, and so before coming here?
Well, I grew up in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
small town of about 3,000 when I was a resident there.
I graduated from Hershey High School and from the Hershey Junior College, which was part of the legacy of Mr. Milton Hershey and his chocolate factory, providing a two-year junior college free for all residents of Hershey.
I received my bachelor's degree from another school just a few miles down the road, Lebanon Valley College, a church affiliated school of really very high quality.
At Lebanon Valley College, I discovered that the academic competition was almost exclusively in the group of pre-meds with whom I was associating.
And when it came time for the pre-meds to apply to medical school, Sam Black did likewise, without ever having before expressed any interest in a career in medicine.
I was accepted to medical school, in fact three of them, Columbia, Cornell, and the University of Pennsylvania, and I went to medical school.
I went to University of Pennsylvania,
where I completed two years and entered my third.
One day I had just scrubbed in for surgery and on the way from the scrub sink to the operating room, I caught a reflection of myself in a mirror, all capped and gowned and masked.
And I looked at me and I said, oh my God, Sam, is that you?
And I didn't recognize me.
I reported to the surgeon in charge that I could not attend that day, broke scrub, redressed, and paraded into the dean's office and resigned from medical school on the spot.
Did I never tell you that before?
Ask.
Of course, those were the days when the draft was in full swing.
Immediately, I became subject to the draft because I could no longer qualify for an educational deferment.
I hastened that whole process by volunteering for the draft.
I was immediately taken and went and spent two years in the Army.
I left the Army to enter graduate school at the University of Michigan in the area of microbiology because in medical school microbiology was perhaps my best and certainly best-liked discipline and completed a PhD at the University of Michigan.
My first professional job was in Texas.
I came to Houston to join the faculty at Baylor College of Medicine, where I spent nearly 10 years.
One day my wife and I looked at each other and said, hey, wouldn't it be sort of fun to experience a change of seasons again?
Why don't we move back north if we have an opportunity?
Well, there was an opportunity.
I was offered a job at Michigan State, and so we moved back to Michigan.
I must say that first winter was a real revelation, and I couldn't wait to leave Michigan.
had an opportunity to come back to Texas, and you can believe that I said a very rapid yes.
And that opportunity, of course, was to come to Texas A&M.
I had met with Dean Jim Knight some months previous.
We felt a certain kinship.
and he offered me a job as part of his original cadre to come to A&M with the challenge to see if we could start a medical school at A&M.
How did you become acquainted with Dr. Knight?
Well, one of my students while I was at Baylor was a fellow by the name of Don Holmquist.
Don Holmquist entered the space program after completing his MD degree at Baylor College of Medicine.
He always said that Sam Black was one of his most favorite professors while he was a medical student.
Don Holmquist was part of the original administrative team for this College of Medicine, and he persuaded Jim Knight that maybe he had a real candidate in Sam Black, and that's how we got acquainted.
And how long did, after that first contact, how long was it before you decided to get here?
Weeks, months?
Oh, I think it was some months.
I don't remember.
I met Jim Knight and his wonderful wife Sally for the first time in New Orleans.
Before he took up residence here in College Station, he invited my wife and me to come to New Orleans to meet with them.
We got along famously, and an invitation to come to A&M followed quite rapidly after that.
Based on your impression at that time,
What was the A&M medical program going to be like?
Well, it was an interesting concept.
It was to be a program that would attempt to knock off two years of the total educational experience by admitting students after just two years of an undergraduate program.
Those two years would be spent here at Texas A&M, and then the students would be admitted directly to a medical program that would be jointly administered by Texas A&M and Baylor College of Medicine.
And an MD degree would be awarded four years later jointly by the two institutions.
All right, and then the Baylor affiliation didn't work out.
Well, it didn't work out because the accrediting agency took the position that a dean cannot report to two masters, that a degree could not be awarded simultaneously by two institutions, that it had to be one or the other,
and how that decision got made I'm not privy to, but eventually Baylor did drop out of the picture.
That meant that we had to go shopping for another primary clinical site for the education of our students.
The medical institutions in Temple had been sort of secondary partners I think quite early on, but with the bowing out of Baylor where our students were
originally to have to go to complete the MD degree.
Since they bowed out, it was then that Scott and White took a dominant position and with funds available from the VA and the VA hospital in Temple became a very major player.
What, when Dr. Knight first chatted with you, what
did you understand your role to be in the new medical program here?
Well, my understanding was that eventually I would build a department of medical microbiology.
And that, in fact, is exactly what I did.
And this is the only money question I'm going to ask you.
What was the beginning salary?
Oh, I remember that only too clearly.
My beginning salary was $35,000.
And your title?
Program director in microbiology for the program in medicine at Texas A&M University.
As far as you recall, about how many other professionals had already been employed at that time?
Oh, I remember that pretty well, too.
There were only two or three in residence.
Jim Knight was here early.
Don Holmquist was in residence.
Bill Kirkendall, to handle the business affairs of this nascent program, was in residence.
I reported for my assignment here on August the 1st of 1975.
And at the same time, there were at least four others who joined the faculty on that same date, including Dr. Alvin Smith, Dr. Joyce Davis, Dr. Bill Ward.
Gina, I can't remember if...
I know that Evie Davenport was hired away from Houston to take care of our learning resources unit that was in the process of rather immediately building up a collection of resource materials.
And Dr. Knight selected all of those?
Yes, he did.
And by and large, what was, was there any similarity in their backgrounds?
Oh, I'm sorry.
There was one other person in residence at that time, Jackson Wagner.
Jackson?
Jackson Wagner, who represented the discipline of anatomy.
And he preceded the rest of us that summer.
He had been here for about six months and was deeply involved in advertising for new faculty and passed on all those materials to us, respectively.
The selection was based on disciplines represented.
It was Jackson in anatomy, Joyce Davis in pathology, Sam Black in microbiology, Elvin Smith in physiology.
There was no one chosen immediately for biochemistry or for pharmacology.
And there was no uniformity as to where they came from geographically?
Well, by coincidence, several of us had experience at Baylor College of Medicine.
Of course, Joyce Davis and Jack Wagner both came from Baylor, as well as myself.
Elvin Smith came from a big physiology lab in Mississippi, the Guyton Laboratory of Physiology, and that was well known to Don Holmquist, and I think that's how that came about.
We'll interrupt the medicine to talk about, describe your move up here and getting settled into College Station.
What was that like for a newcomer?
We came to Texas by car.
I had the previous year purchased a little mini Austin car abroad, and that was our only car.
So we left Michigan.
We packed up my wife of less than a year and our new child, one month old, born in mid-July,
and drove in caravan with my wife's parents who came to visit us from the Netherlands.
And we made the long three-day trip in caravan from Ann Arbor.
In the middle of summer, we arrived here in time for August the 1st start date.
That was quite an experience.
And what did you find as housing accommodations?
Where did you live?
We had been in touch with the Kirkendalls.
Betsy Kirkendall was a realtor, and we had pretty much decided that we were going to build.
My wife and I had made several previous visits to College Station, discovered that there wasn't very much on the market at that time, and certainly not
a home of the design sort of modernistic that we preferred, and we decided to build.
So we settled into a small two-bedroom apartment at Parkway, on the Southwest Parkway, where we resided for the next eight months, I guess it was, before our house was ready for us.
And how were you received here?
What was it like to be a newcomer in College Station Bryant?
Well, we met some very nice neighbors at Parkway who became our first and perhaps closest friends for a period of time, all of whom were there on a temporary basis and shared some of the newcomer feelings, I'm sure, with us.
The other new appointees to this new, yet to become a college of medicine, became really fast and close friends.
But in general, I think that we felt an exceedingly fine welcome at the university in general.
It was interesting because space was at a premium.
I remember my first office in the sub-basement of the Teague building.
I am told that at one point it was considered that the sub-basement of Teague would be the entire medical school.
And I'm not sure how many offices were there, but there weren't very many, plus a laboratory for the instructional program in gross anatomy and a couple of minuscule laboratories that were to be used for teaching in the first two years.
Now did students, were students enrolled that first fall?
No.
We arrived in 75, as I said.
We could not matriculate any students without provisional accreditation from the liaison committee on medical education.
And that took a while to achieve so that the first students were enrolled in 1977.
You started in 75.
and Teague Building.
Describe your understanding of what Dr. Knight's plan was.
How was he trying to go about to bring this school into reality?
What was his style, his manner, his movement?
I don't know.
I want to answer that.
Did he appear to have a plan?
Did it seem he had a plan?
I'm not ever sure that he had a real plan, in all honesty.
I had the impression that he thought he could build this new medical school by sitting at his desk in the Teague building without ever going anywhere.
I think that was his basic undoing.
I think that his presence was absolutely essential in Temple as relationships with Scott and White and the VA were beginning to form.
He was not eager to be on the road a great deal.
Was the relation with Scott and White and the VA, was that already solid when you all got here?
It was still forming.
Can you share anything about how it was formed?
gosh who were the people that made it happen as far as your well i do know that uh walter brindley that scott and white was a key figure he sat on the coordinating board i think at the time that the establishment of a new medical school in texas under the auspices of the va was being considered he was a strong ally and has remained to be a strong ally
for this enterprise ever since and a good solid friend of mine.
And typist that's Walter with a V. Walter with a V. Kermit Knutson was one of the key players back at that time who
was eventually given the title Associate Dean for Clinical Affairs.
So you're talking about Kermit Knutson, I believe.
He became Associate Dean for Clinical Affairs eventually and was in that position for a fair number of years.
At the VA, those interests were represented by, oh my gosh,
This old man is having some memory lapses on occasion.
Gosh.
But from first, VA was positive in every way.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
And despite Jim's
disinterest in a lot of trips to Temple.
There were those of us who made many, many trips to Temple, and good professional relationships and good solid friendships were the consequence of that.
Am I correct in my summation to people that
It appeared to us here that both Scott and White and the VA in Temple were willing to do everything they could to help this medical school succeed as long as it did not impede their medical...
I think that's very accurate.
Yes, absolutely.
Who were the key people outside medicine at Texas A&M University helping the medical program come about?
Oh, gosh.
I know that Mac Prescott was...
He won the vice president of academic affairs in 75.
No, but he was dean of science, and I remember very well meeting with Mac early after I got here seeking a joint appointment in biology, and he was very supportive, I think, of the program within the university.
Others that
Calhoun, Prescott, Calhoun, Wainerdi.
Calhoun and certainly Wainerdi because it is my understanding that this was in fact Wainerdi's dream that he sold to the higher ups.
He thought that Texas A&M ought eventually to have some of these other professional programs that make for a true university.
And so he was a very, very staunch supporter and ally.
Did you all have any contact early on directly with Dr. Williams?
I didn't personally except for an interview I sought with Jack K. Williams soon after I got here because I
had a contact at University of Michigan who knew Jack K. Williams and asked that I please meet with him and pass along this individual's personal regards.
And so I had a very early opportunity to meet Dr. Williams.
What was your impression of him?
Oh, I was very impressed.
I can remember that rather vividly.
All right, so during that first year, 75-76, then you all are trying to make arrangements to make things come about.
What were the major steps between your arrival, time you arrived here, and when the first students enrolled?
What were the major?
Well, the major challenge was, of course, building a curriculum that would pass muster with the accrediting people, and we worked very, very hard at that.
The other was attempting to find faculty who could deliver that educational program.
And so all of the basic science departments began slowly but steadily to identify people who would fit into this evolving program.
And did you get some faculty here?
Oh, yes.
Not in 1975.
I believe that I brought in my first faculty in 1970.
76.
David McMurray, who is still here.
John Quarles, who is still here, were two of my original hires.
And then a year later, Dr. Karin Eiler.
Karin Eiler, I-H-L-E-R, whose husband was selected as the first head of Department of Medical Biochemistry.
When you talked to those prospective faculty members, what did you tell them this medical school was going to be?
I told them that this was a high-risk opportunity, but one that they couldn't afford to miss.
It is a very exciting thing to be
be given the privilege of starting with something brand new.
I was upfront with the people I recruited by saying that there was this program I thought would succeed, but there was almost an equal chance that it would not succeed.
And they just had to make a gamble.
Was there any other medical school that you and your colleagues were using as a model?
No.
In terms of curriculum design, we did consult with the accrediting agency about curriculum design.
We were given the advice,
be too experimental.
Use the tried and true.
You're more likely to succeed if you do that.
And so, in fact, those of us who were intimate with curriculum development did choose a fairly traditional model that existed at that time in maybe 75% of all North American medical schools.
And all of the primary arrangements were taking place in the Teague building.
Yes.
The basement and only?
Well, the dean's office was on the first floor, and the first learning resources unit was on the second floor, but all on the same end of the multi-branch Teague building.
And you all were planning for how many students in the first place?
We were planning for 32, a class of 32.
When did you get the first major positive reaction of coordinating board or accrediting agency?
Do you remember what the first big step was that looked positive?
No, I'm sorry.
Do you know, do you remember anything about when the decision was made, when and how the decision was made to back away from the link to Baylor?
Yeah, I think that came in 1976.
I remember a delegation of us, a small one, accompanying Dean Jim Knight to the Texas Medical Center.
We had a high-powered meeting in the doctor's club, and it became apparent that Baylor was not terribly willing to give up control.
They wanted full control or none.
and we took the position that they couldn't have full control, that we were in residence and we were in charge of our own program, and I think that's what led me ultimately to their backing down.
Did you get the impression that any of the medical schools already existing in Texas opposed A&M?
I don't have a good sense of that, Haskell.
That probably is true.
No, I don't know.
I don't know that.
I mean, we kept hearing rumors that we were new and small and highly vulnerable and that there were those folks not in sympathy with the development of one more medical school.
But, in fact, A&M had been approved by the Coordinating Board for the beginning of a new medical program sponsored through the T. Cranston Bill.
That bill was, what, of 1974 or something in that era.
We did have some visitors from other, at least one other medical school visit here.
Charlie Mullins from the University of Texas was a consultant somewhere along the line, and he seemed to be highly supportive.
this new program.
You mentioned the Teague-Cranston bill.
Yes.
Did you see much of Congressman Olin Teague?
I never met Congressman Olin Teague, unfortunately.
I'm sorry that that never happened.
Let me add as a editorial note to this tape,
one day in a comparatively extended, in terms of number of people, discussion, I remember Mr. Teague saying he wished that he could do something to help fund it, but that he couldn't think of anything he could do in Washington.
But as chairman of the Veterans Affairs Committee,
that he really was saddened by the fact that there was not close relationship between medical schools and VA hospitals.
That if they would do that, he might could help.
Yours truly in the back row said, there's a VA hospital in Temple.
And he made a note of some sort.
And within about a year.
Well, that paid off.
I don't know whether there's any link or not.
But Mr. Teague certainly was a positive person in Washington, D.C. And in fact, the Teague Cranston bill supported initially the establishment of at least four, maybe there were six, new medical schools in close affiliation with veterans hospitals in various parts of the country.
I remember well...
After Jim Knight was here and settled and submitted a request for additional funds to the Veterans Administration on top of the original appropriation, that Texas A&M was awarded a grant from the VA of $17 million.
which we were told at the time was the largest grant this university had ever gotten from a federal source.
Then in the middle of all of this effort in 1976, the centennial year of Texas A&M, Dr. Williams has his heart attack.
Yes.
Did his illness and being promoted to chancellor, did it change?
hurt the medical school's progress?
I'm not aware that it really did hurt.
The presidency was assumed by Jarvis Miller, and my recollection is that Jarvis Miller was highly supportive of this new medical school.
It began about the time that his presidency began, and he was almost willing to tie his rising star to this rising academic program that was new to the campus.
And Dr. Prescott becomes the new Vice President of Academic Affairs, and he was supportive, as Calhoun had been.
Do you remember the visit by any of the liaison committee accreditation folks?
Did they come here for an on-site visit?
Oh, yes.
And what was it like?
And I don't have any remembrance of any of those meetings, unfortunately.
I just don't have none.
But you don't remember any negative?
I don't remember anything negative.
Do you remember when word came of a positive reading by the LCMA?
Oh, I think that it was in the late winter or early spring of 77.
We had barely six months in order to gear up to admit a first class.
That began in September of 77, and we couldn't really do anything with admissions until we had gotten that provisional accreditation.